
Author: Roxana Tesileanu, roxana.te@web.de
Affiliation: INCDS/Romania, Brasov Station
Date: January 2018

Letting animals breathe: two cases for reconciliation ecology

- alleviating the human impact in highly affected/degraded ecosystems
- cases:
    - bears in Romania => supplemental feeding => destabilized metapopulation => after Oct. 2016, potential diffusion from places of high densities to places of low densities if supplemental feeding is stopped.
    - wolves in Baden-Wuerttenberg/Germany => lack of wild prey => lack of survival chances => a reduction of the cull on deer would potentially create room for the wolf in Baden-Wuerttenberg/Germany, together with measures of decreasing its prey on domestic animals. Also solitary individuals are more likely not going to survive, if they come through dispersal. In order to enhance the chances of a wolves population, a reintroduction is needed, synchronized with measures of decreasing predation on domestic animals and an increase of the deer population through a reduction of cull on deer. 
    Furthermore, attitude research only sketches the rough overall situation. For complex decisional contexts, decision analysis is needed in order to identify the problems/fears and find solutions through procedural assessment, in the spirit of reconciliation ecology and sustainable development.  

Romania has the potential to act as ecological biodiversity source (without endangering its sustainable development) if wildlife populations are not kept closed through supplemental feeding. Also, it cannot afford to lose wildlife individuals to ecological sinks where these cannot survive or reproduce. Therefore a pan-european strategy of wildlife management is needed, especially for the large carnivores. Methods from decision analysis could help finding realistic solutions to this challenge.  


References:
Sinclair et al. 2006, Wildlife Ecology, Conservation and Management, Blackwell Publishing.
Rosenzweig 1971, Paradox of Enrichment: Destabilization of Exploitation in Ecological Time, Nature.
Fischhoff 2006, Constructing preferences from labile values. In The Construction of Preference, Ed. Lichtenstein, Slovic, CUP.
